/It Makes Sense in My Head Theater/
Proudly presents:

The Treasure Chest In The Dungeon and Causality


In this I will use the recurring trope of dungeon treasure chests, an
adventure containing a Dragon, and a supposed personage filling those treasure
chests. Heavily congectured causality ensues. Hang onto your sanity and save 
questions for the end if you can.


We have a simple setup. We're mostly concerned with One Room. This room has at 
least one treasure chest, and at least one door or entryway. Near this room is 
a Dragon. The Defeating the Dragon in some way is the goal of an adventure, 
and as such every potential option for hope against the adventure is explored.

The chest or chests are thus guaranteed to be investigated and for our 
purposes "looted". Indeed part of the narrative is that the chest or chests 
are always replenished.

This is where our Treasure Chest Technician comes into play. Also how they 
react to the chest or chests /being empty/. The Technician cannot be 
interacted with by normal means. The Technician can interact or not interact 
as they see fit. They can put anything or nothing in the chest.


Let's start with a completely a-causal setup again these are /for the 
Technician/. One chest, it is already empty, the Technician does not refill 
it, and the adventurers move on to the Dragon. The Technician here decided to 
not mess with the adventurer's mission either by choice, inaction or 
prevention of action.

Another group proceeds into the dungeon and this time The Technician fills two 
chests, one with marbles and the other with a thick grease. The Technician did 
not do this in expectation for the adventurers to use the items. They -the 
items- just so happen to be useful together or separately or even collected 
and sold. An enterprising group might make fantastic use -depending on the 
Dragon, the rest of the dungeon, etc. But that's outside the room, and for 
this part of the narrative The Technician doesn't care either by choice, 
inaction or prevention of action.

But what if they cared?

Well in an acausal setup still, The Technician might put in a magical device 
to teleport behind the slumbering Dragon. Or a magical sword that is a bane of 
dragons. A long lost egg dearly missed by the Dragon. Or might have the chest 
CONTAIN THE DRAGON'S HORDE kind of nullifying the adventure right there. Being 
acausal towards their adventure this is all justified. They have placed 
contents once for one adventure and to the adventurers the chest or chests are 
random while completely useful... well unless you looked forward to defeating 
the Dragon through wit, cunning or force of arms. But The Technician here is 
acausal. The causal system of the adventurers going on adventure is outside 
The Technician.

What if they cared but wanted the adventurers to fail? Perhaps a dragon 
attractant so they come in and the Dragon is here lurking about the chest in 
ambush. Or the chest sucks them into the dragon's stomach -upsetting all 
involved.

Now then let's move on to paracausality as acausality runs all gamuts and 
potentials from caring about this barely connected causal system of dragon, 
adventurer, rewarded adventurers.

We can still start out with caring however. A Paracausal Technician can place 
things into the chest to help or hinder the adventure. And they can adjust the 
contents to best effect their desired outcome. "Oh I hope there's a better 
runeaxe somewhere in this dungeon..." They can adjust the contents to match or 
deny this vehement desire for a better runeaxe. And being Paracausal they can 
even observe multiple parallel attempts even actual separate attempts on the 
dragon. This way because they care about this causal system -the adventure- 
they can better reward or flummox the participants within it.

Say we have an Anticausal Technician. Well now we're firmly in the realm of 
this other causal system. Granted The Technician is still outside of the 
system, but they are almost part of the equation leading to the results.
Anticausal Technician knows that something they put in the chest lead to the 
Dragon's defeat. So they put exactly that in the chest. This way when the 
adventurers arrive, they find it and proceed to the Dragon and Defeat it. 
Because The Technician was Anticausal they knew the future, how that future 
came about and extrapolated the past and present.

Opposingly we have the Causal Dungeon Chest Technician. They put in a long 
lost dragon egg known far and wide to be beloved and treasured and dearly 
missed by the Dragon. There is one successful outcome. The adventurers present 
the egg, and are rewarded by the 'now defeated' Dragon. If they take it from 
the dungeon well bad things could happen. If they cook the egg, bad things 
could happen. If they hatch the egg... well... things might still look up for 
them as Dragons talk to their eggs and are answered by the unhatched for 
purposes of this narrative. They might even be heaped with rewards depending 
on how nest bound the Dragon was.

But at the end of the day there was A Thing -or Things- in the chest(s) with a 
given predictable outcome. Here it was an egg, it could have been a magical 
blade, or other object to use for victory. But because it was known from 
previous data, what to put in the chest was obvious, and the outcome was easy 
to see.

If say our Technician is actively trying to understand this system that barely 
includes them. Perhaps they are stymied in some fashion from leaving the room 
with the chest or chests. Well even if they only have some of the information 
this Noncausal version of The Technician can 'do the math'. They know for a 
fact adventurers will come, they know for a fact the goal is the dragon's 
defeat. They can work backwards from the defeat, forwards and backwards from 
their own chest(s), or they can simply place something in the chest like a 
blatant note, like this one, "You need a wizard or wizard biproduct," if the 
party composition is wrong. So that they can then put in the given item for a 
given outcome... say Dragon Flambe.

No matter how this works out our Technician has been immune to the causality 
of this other system. If the Dragon exploded or rampaged tearing the entire 
dungeon apart they would be perfectly fine finding another dungeon and another 
room and another chest to fill with their chest filling powers.

Of course things change a bit if something is amiss on the causality edges.

What if something doesn't want the chest found? But they can't stop the chest 
from being filled, so they can't prevent the Dragon being defeated. Or can 
they? What if they can hide the door?

Well now we have a situation. We have someone trying to fill chests in a room 
to help or hinder ... well let's stick with help. So we have The Technician 
trying to help the adventures reach an established outcome. But we've already 
stated the present has been changed, and the future might be up in the air.

Well. Nothing says they can't listen for adventurers and call out to them 
from behind the hidden -or removed- entrance. The Technician is very invested 
in the adventure's causal system. For good or ill to them. But the future is 
known, the past is known and some magnificent bastard has altered the 
present.

And that just won't do for our Retrocausal Tech.

The Technician knows this Dragon must defeat or be defeated by the adventurers 
perhaps because either way the dungeon is vacated, and a new foe moves in. 
Perhaps a string of new foes is known to move in one after the other to be 
defeated or victorious over adventurers and their adventures.

Perhaps this long string of adventures lead our Technician to their Treasure 
Chest filling powers.

Well. The second the string of events is adjusted, the Technician has some 
issues with existence. But let's say they can't be completely vanished due to 
their already profound reality manipulative powerset.

Afterall why not say it's reality manipulation. We're already imagining for 
this experiment that they can put anything they want in the chest. Perhaps 
they can put into the chest a fix for the erroneous future. But they have to 
have someone else open the chest. That's the given up till now. And let's say 
somehow that's rigid.

With me on this new paradigm?

The Technician can't open the chest themselves, the string that lead to their 
reality manipulative causality manipulative powerset is in jeopardy.

It all comes down to their chest. Maybe other events will need to be fixed 
too, but first things first. This chest right now.

Well you could say this event has serious temporal mechanical pull. it's going 
to change the timeline. A timeline of events that lead to cauality 
manipulation, and so it can't just snuff it at a snap of its metaphorical 
fingers.

But how to get someone here to the chest in the first place? Locally no one 
knows the timeline is at stake. BUT someone from down the road likely does as 
their existence is threatened because they are the product of these events.

So our Retrocausal or Perhaps even /Omnicausal/ Technician need only wait. 
Someone they've touched the life of before will come along and open the chest 
and the repairs will begin. Afterall the fact the chest -MUST always- be 
opened, and the chest had something that would be useful to someone trying to 
fix the damage means the dead timeline is never really dead.

Of course if enough changes by outside forces are done the dungeon might 
simply break off from the otherwise normal NEW causal reality around it. Even 
though The Technician is within. And in that chest right there is the key to 
it all.

Huh. A chest being the key. That's a interesting twist.


I hope I have sparked your mind. I hope I've unlocked new avenues of your 
thinking. At least I hope I've give3n you fresh questions... but I'll settle 
for a light entertainment. Maybe? Perhaps? Aw come on. Pleeeese?

In any event, we're done here.


Sources?

Well of the ones I can state were on my mind as I wrote this:

Phantasy Star Online 2 -introduction to Chapter 5 primarily which explains 
what Photons ARE outside of a flavored magical system present in all things. 
They are the multicolored INK of the Akashic Record. You are brought in to 
help as in one future timeline YOU become a part of a Para or Acausal entity, 
and due to that the Librarian of the record enlists your aid to correct the 
timelines at multiple points, rescuing other Causally Adjusted entities from 
being lost in the timestream.

Fate-verse - Fate Grand Order specifically. Your job there is to work out of a 
piece of the timeline set to be erased as human history has been changed at 
key points that jeopardize the current location's existence. Not to mention -
but I'll mention it- the existence of all humankind. Because of the nature of 
the facility you have great boons available to correct these wrong in time -
called Singularities as they suck on these turning points in human 
advancement and threads of Fate. As you rescue human history from these dark 
forces you gain more and more agents and agency in saving the timeline. 
Additionaly contains Lostbelts... or Singularities that have been trimmed away 
from the greater thread of fate, but due to their own touched causalities can 
attempt to change the course of human history to bring time in line with their 
own existence. In a way before human history is saved you work out of a 
Lostbelt... or satellite existence/timeline

Destiny 2 and the greater Destiny universe - Paracausality.

And a few discussions about Causality both on the internet for all the see, 
and in chatrooms on Discord.

https://www.researchgate.net/post/Is_an_anticausal_system_the_same_as_a_non-causal_system
https://www.bungie.net/en-us/Forums/Post/171287840?sort=0&page=0&path=1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causality_(physics)
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retrocausality

